Cosmic rays. I've been fascinated by
cosmic rays since I first heard about
these strange particles with high energy
coming into the Earth's atmosphere from
outer space. We now know that they're
charged particles. And because they're
charged, they get caught up by Earth's
magnetic field and funneled in somewhat
at the poles, but they also spiral
around moving through that magnetic
field. They get deflected and that makes
it very difficult to work out where they
have actually come from.
They also get deflected before they
enter the Earth's atmosphere by things
like the sun's magnetic field and indeed
that of the whole of the rest of the
galaxy. So that adds to the challenge of
finding where they have originated.
When they come into the Earth's
atmosphere, they collide with the atoms
of oxygen high in the thin gas at the
top of the atmosphere, knocking
electrons off and causing that green
glow that we see as the aurora. And
lower down, they will create other
colors like the purple fringe that we
have there along the bottom of the
curtain aurora. That's created when they
strike nitrogen molecules in the thicker
part of the atmosphere lower down.
So what we have is these primary cosmic
rays coming from outer space with very
high energy smashing into particles and
they create showers of secondary
particles. Pions, muons, neutrinos,
gamma rays, other forms of light
all coming down somewhat deflected from
the original trajectory even of the
primary cosmic ray. So we get these
showers of secondaries.
Now it was first proved that this was
indeed happening by Theodore Wolf in
1909. He had developed a device called
an electrometer that could measure the
amount of ionizing radiation in the
environment.
This device essentially you charged it
up and it would be discharged by strikes
from charged uh radiation and the rate
at which the charge collapsed showed you
how much ionizing radiation there was.
Now he took it up the Eiffel Tower to
get away from the ground.
It was known the work of people like
Mari Cury and so on that radiation
seemed to originate from heavy
uh elements such as uranium and radium
in particular in the minerals of the
earth. And so Wolfford had realized that
if you went high up away from the earth
and got away from all of those earthly
sources of decaying heavy elements in
the rock, then you should see a reduced
rate. But he didn't. It was actually
higher as he got to the top of the
Eiffel Tower.
And this was confirmed three years later
by Victor Hess in 1912. He took an
electrometer. In fact, three of these
high accuracy wolf electromemeters were
taken high up on a balloon flight and he
found increases in the ionization rate
that increased according to the
altitude. And by the time he was at the
top at 5,300 m, the radiation was four
times what it was at ground level.
He was even able with one flight to go
up during a near total solar eclipse and
therefore
confirming that the radiation was still
there and that this wasn't therefore
radiation from the sun because the moon
should have been blocking the majority
of it.
Now we still use high alitude balloons
for studying cosmic rays today. This is
Bess. The instrument on the crane there
is attached to long cables. It's going
to be lofted high into the thin
atmosphere on this very very gossamer
like balloon and used to study cosmic
rays.
Now the name cosmic rays comes from an
idea from Robert Milikin. He who came up
with the oil drop experiment that was
able to measure the charge on the
electron. But he didn't believe that
these were charged particles. He thought
this was electromagnetic radiation with
very high energy, perhaps up beyond the
uh end of the known electromagnetic
spectrum, higher energy than even gamma
rays. And he thought that these were
colliding with particles in the air and
creating further X and gamma ray
radiation lower down. But that's not
true. And it was proved because Jacob
Clay did experiments while sailing home
from the island of Java back to the
Netherlands in Europe
in 1927.
And what he found was that the cosmic
ray intensity
increased as he moved from the
equatorial region and the tropics
towards the mid latitude. The further
north he went, the higher the amount of
cosmic ray activity he was able to
detect. And he inferred that these
primary cosmic rays were being funneled
in at the poles by the Earth's magnetic
field. And that must mean that they were
charged and not photons of ordinary
electromagnetic radiation.
And during the period from 1930 to 1945,
further experiments were done proving
that cosmic rays are mostly high energy
protons. The nuclei of hydrogen atoms
with one positive charge. These create
the secondary radiation in collisions in
the air. And we see at the ground
electrons, photons and particles called
muons, which I shall talk about later.
But in 1948, heavier nuclei were found.
10% of the primary cosmic rays were
shown to be in fact the nuclei of helium
atoms, alpha particles with two positive
charges. And a small percentage, just 1%
in total, were other heavy nuclei,
carbon, iron, even particles as heavy as
the nuclei of lead were detected.
all moving with very very high speeds,
very high energies.
And of course, this period then saw us
beginning to send probes into space. And
in 1958, Explorer 1 made it high enough
above the Earth's atmosphere to measure
cosmic rays in space, detecting protons
with 30 million electron volts of energy
and electrons with 3 million. Now,
electrons with 3 million, that's uh
onetenth the energy, but they must have
been moving even faster because
electrons weigh 2,000 times less than
protons roughly speaking. And so, from
the rule of kinetic energy of a half mv
squared, these have must have been
moving much much faster to only have
onetenth the energy.
The other thing that Explorer 1
discovered was that in certain regions
the instruments completely saturated
with this radiation and this was the
first hint of something called the Van
Allen radiation belts. Now these Van
Allen belts are huge regions of trapped
charged particles with high energy
moving in loops around the earth's
magnetic field and they get trapped in
particular
near to the equator. The regions near
the poles see the Van Allen belts dip
down towards the atmosphere and
dissipate. And that's of course where
the radiation of the comes in to create
the aurora.
When the Apollo astronauts went to the
moon, they had to avoid the Van Allen
belts and fly on a trajectory that
minimized the time spent in the dense
parts of those belts.
Now, we can on occasion detect the
source of some of this radiation.
The moon gets struck by gamma rays in
the cosmic bombardment and that creates
further particles that are bounced off
the moon and we can detect them. We can
see the reflection of gamma rays
detected in this bright blob that is an
image of the moon by the Compton
Gammaray Observatory, a spacecraft that
was able to actually create some rough
images of the origin of these gamma
rays. Um but we can also detect cosmic
rays, charged particles as well as this
electromagnetic radiation.
One of the main sources out in deep
space seems to be supernovi. This is
Tao's
supernova remnant. The explosion was
seen in 1572 and we now see the
expanding shock wave of high-speed
material ejected by the death of this
giant star. And this has accelerated
particles in the explosion to near light
speed as they travel across the cosmos
and arrive here as high energy cosmic
rays.
But a better study really was the best
seen supernova of modern times and that
was supernova 1987a.
This was a core collapse, a type two
supernova where a giant star came to the
end of its life and blew up, but it was
in the large melanic cloud, not in the
Milky Way. So, it was 160,000
light years from us.
So, we saw it in 1987,
but the light from the explosion had
been traveling for 160,000 years to get
to us.
Now since before the explosion the Yatuk
connect uh detector had been measuring a
fairly constant background rate of high
energy cosmic rays with energies of 10^
the 17 to 10 the 18th power in electron
volts terms that's very very high power
and that suddenly rose by 45% in 1996
with much of the increase being these
heavy nuclei iron
and other heavy particles.
And 14 years later, it returned back to
normal in 2010.
What this was, we think, was the energy
of the 1987 supernova
creating showers of very very high speed
iron nuclei and other atomic nuclei
hurled towards the earth at a speed of
99.9995%
of the speed of light. And that very
very slightly
lower speed is responsible for that
9-year delay in their arrival time. The
light of course took 160,000 years to
get to us and the high energy particles
took an extra 9 years because they
weren't able to quite keep up with the
light beam. Nothing can travel faster
than light and in fact the uh massive
particles can only approach the speed of
light. But these were nearly there
showing that the supernova had
accelerated these particles to
absolutely enormous speeds and therefore
incredible energies.
Now I said I would mention muons which
we detect. These are very strange
particles indeed. They caused some
constonnation when they were detected. I
think uh uh famously the phrase was who
ordered that because nobody had
predicted their existence.
These are heavy cousins of the electron.
They have one negative charge but they
have about 200 times the mass of an
electron and they are unstable. They
decay by radioactive processes and on
average that they only last around two
micros seconds 2 millionth of a second.
So they're quite fleeting in their
existence. But traveling at the speed of
light, two microsconds is a distance
covered of 600 m. So how come we detect
them at the ground? Are they only
created in that bottom 600 m of the
atmosphere? No, that's not correct.
We've detected them much, much higher up
and they are moving down towards us from
actually really quite high altitudes
around about 30 or 40 kilometers in many
cases. So this takes some explaining and
in fact it's that man Einstein that
comes to the rescue here. What he showed
with his theory of special relativity
was that very high speed makes clocks
tick more slowly according to the
formula in the box at the right there.
So the apparent time is equal to the
time divided by this factor which is the
square root of 1 minus the velocity
squared divided by the speed of light
squared. And so if you increase the
speed all the way up to very nearly the
speed of light, then you end up uh
slowing down the rate at which the clock
appears to tick. And so at the speed
that these muons are traveling of well
over 99% of the speed of light, they
suffer a slowdown by a factor of 70. And
so they're able to make it all the way
to the ground. Quite an amazing result.
And actually this is a proof really of
the fact that Einstein was right about
this.
Now these particles are traveling so
nearly at the speed of light. And when I
say the speed of light, I mean the speed
of light in a vacuum. Because in air,
light travels slightly more slowly. It
travels even more slowly in glass.
That's what gives us the phenomenon of
refraction. But C is this absolute limit
for the speed of light in a vacuum.
And this creates something very
interesting. It creates radiation called
Cherankov radiation.
When a particle is traveling faster than
the speed of light in the medium in
which it finds itself, in our case air,
but also in other materials like water,
then
an effect of this is to cause the medium
to emit chiranov radiation. This is a
strange ghostly blue light. You see it
coming from the showers of high energy
cosmic rays because they're exceeding
the speed of light in air even though
they're not exceeding the absolute speed
of light. And we also see it in the
ghostly blue glow around nuclear
reactors. The top photograph, a nuclear
reactor in a pool of water. The speed of
light in water is significantly slower.
That's what causes the refraction you
see when you look into a pond or a
swimming pool. And the radiation from
the nuclear reactor is coming out faster
than the local speed of light in the
water and creating this blue sharov
radiation. And this is something that
astronomers study quite intensely. This
is a picture that I took on a visit to
La Palama, the island in the Canary
Islands with lots of different
telescopes up on the top of the uh
island there at high altitude, able to
get away from the ravages of the
weather. Most of the weather happens
below the top of the mountain here. And
indeed, it's nice and dry and got a uh
limited amount of atmosphere above it.
So, it's a great place to do astronomy.
And the photograph here is the magic
array.
This is a Sharenov array detector
picking up that blue light from cosmic
rays. And magic, you have to have a good
acronym. Stands for major atmospheric
gamma imaging cherinkov telescopes.
Little bit of a mouthful, but this made
a very significant detection. It picked
up a gamma ray from the Crab Nebula. And
the Crab Nebula, very famous exploded
star that was detected by Chinese
astronomers in the year 1054 AD, has a
huge expanding shock wave driving
material out at high energies. And in
2019, a gamma ray of over 100 terra
electron volts was found coming from it,
the first identified source of such high
energy rays. Now, that high energy is a
problem because it actually defies some
of the models of what's going on in the
uh center of the Crab Nebula there. It
uh doesn't seem right that such a high
energy gamma ray can be coming from this
source. And uh there are a number of
other puzzles about the Crab Nebula. And
I think I've done a video called Once
Around the Crab Nebula if you're
interested in why this uh particular
situation has occurred and why we are so
puzzled by it.
There's another telescope that is
involved in detecting Churankov
radiation. This is Veritas, the very
energetic radio imaging telescope array
system. Another great acronym there.
It's in Arizona. It has four 12 m dishes
that reflect and detect the churenov
radiation. And this was operational from
and discovered the first blazar. Here is
blazar TXS0506
plus056.
What a name, eh? And uh this was the
giant explosion of a very very massive
object at a huge distance somewhere in
Orion 5.7 billion light years distant.
So this sort of astronomy can pick up
these incredibly violent events at
immense distances. And I might look into
this blazar in another video.
Here's
one that really doesn't look like a
telescope at all. This is the Pierre
Orga Observatory and spent 20 years
detecting cosmic rays. Um, consists of a
whole lot of things that look like um
some sort of uh garbage bin scattered
around in the desert.
So, this made a very good dete proof. It
detected something called the GZK flux
suppression and was also able to detect
the directionality of the cosmic rays
and prove that there are hot spots for
them out there in the cosmos. Not
absolutely accurate but it was able to
give us some idea of where these have
come from. And you can see that uh that
can be very helpful. Now, the GZ Z K
limit, named after the three scientists
that predicted it,
is an upper limit for how energetic
we should find these particles to be.
And it works out to be 5 * 10 19 in
electron volt units.
It's caused because the cosmic rays and
gamma rays are traveling through the
cosmos through and mixing with the
cosmic microwave background radiation.
And collisions with the CMBB photons
should cause emission of pairs of either
pions or electrons and posetrons. and in
the process denued the cosmic rays and
gamma rays of energy.
And any cosmic ray starting with more
energy than this particular value should
lose it within the first 150 million
light years of travel. So this only
affects our observations of things that
are well beyond the Milky Way. But it
does mean that it's very peculiar to
find any really really high energy
cosmic rays coming from very deep space.
Indeed,
you can see in the graph how the energy
rolls off at about that 10^ the 19
electron volts level.
And that brings me to this thing, which
looks like a set of steel drums from a
Jamaican uh uh steel band here, but is
actually the flies eye array that was
built in Utah in the 1980s and operated
all the way through to 2006. And this
too is a Sharenov radiation detector
looking for very high energy cosmic
rays. And in 1981, it discovered
something called the OMG particle.
The OMG particle, the Oh my god
particle. It's so named because it was
seven times over the limit over that G
uh Z K limit of the maximum possible
energy 3 * 10 the 12 uh sorry 3212
* 10 12 electron volts the kinetic
energy of a cricket ball in one tiny
subatomic particle.
And the question really was
how did this come to be? Was it local in
which case the GZK limit doesn't apply?
Was it a very very heavy massive
particle traveling with lower velocity?
Could it indeed be a dark matter wimp
particle, a so-called weakly interacting
massive particle? Was this perhaps the
detection of one of these missing
elements of the universe?
and it was roughly coming from the Ursa
Major hotspot out there in deep space.
What it what this really was, we're not
quite sure. And uh more detections of
such things and being able to isolate
where they might have come from
out there in the cosmos and finding the
source could help to solve this mystery.
Another observatory that gets in on this
act is the Ice Cube Observatory down at
the South Pole. This uh strange looking
building here is the top part where the
instruments are held and where the
measurements are made of an array of
detectors that look like this strange uh
little uh round sphere here that are
lowered down in to holes drilled in a 1
kilometer
diameter sized region of ice in the
polar ice cap there.
And all that ice shields them from a lot
of uh spirious radiation, but the high
energy particles can still get through
and create shrinkov radiation in the
water in the ice which these detectors
can pick up. And because there's a very
large number of them down in these
holes, um over 5,000 of them on 86
strings down to a depth of 2.5
kilometers in fact um so well buried.
They are able to isolate these showers
of particles.
Now they're also able to detect cosmic
particles called neutrinos.
And the neutrinos
are very very weakly interacting. So
they're very difficult to detect, but
they can go right through the earth.
Whereas the cosmic rays can make it
through the atmosphere and into the ice,
but they can't get through the solid
body of the earth. So if we see
particles coming up from underneath then
these must be neutrinos and they have
penetrated all the way through the core
of the earth before very very
occasionally getting lucky and striking
uh the particles in the ice cube array
and making the detection.
And using this we were able to detect
the shadow of the moon because the moon
also can provide
a blockage to cosmic ray showers and
indeed to neutrinos to a very small
extent. And so we were able to use the
ice cube array to see the shadowing
effect of the moon. I think that's quite
incredible. Other cosmic ray experiments
include this one, the AMS
01 and O2 detectors. And these were
little units that were built and flown
up on the International Space Station
and taken up there by the space shuttle
first in 1998 and later in 2011 for the
second mission. And these have detected
all sorts of interesting cosmic rays and
radiation in space. They detected
anti-roton,
particles of antimatter in and around
the Van Allen belts. Seems to be quite
an intense source of antimatter.
Not only anti-rotons, but some
anti-helium nuclei. Very, very tiny
amount, just a few parts per billion.
Possibly it also detected an excess of
high energy posetrons and that might be
confirmation of a particle called a
neutralino which has been hypothesized
in connection with the source of dark
matter. But uh other explanations such
as pulsars being the source of these
protons have not yet been ruled out and
maybe even detected some strange matter
stranglets
matter particles containing
strange quarks. And if you want to hear
more about that I've got a story all
about quark stars and strange matter in
another video. So very very interesting
hints of strange and interesting
physics. Now on the ground, cosmic rays
are also helpful. They create carbon 14
atoms. They strike particles such as
ordinary nitrogen and can make it into
radioactive carbon 14. And this happens
at a more or less constant uh speed and
keeps the level of carbon 14 up at a
fairly constant level in the atmosphere.
And of course that's then absorbed in
carbon dioxide by living things, plants.
And indeed plants are then eaten by
animals. And so it ends up in the
remains of uh decaying organic matter
and allows us to work out how long it
has been since that fairly level amount
of carbon 14 was injected and has now
decayed with its 5,700 year halflife
um since the breathing in of carbon 14
stopped. And that works very well as a
way of dating things up to perhaps 30 or
40 maybe 50,000 years ago. After that it
becomes much less accurate and we have
to use other radio isotopes for dating.
But we also have to correct for the
variation and in particular atmospheric
Abomb tests of the 1960s certainly
changed the amount of carbon 14 in the
atmosphere. the sunspot cycle has an
effect and there are other confounding
factors of course including some of the
supernova phenomenon that we've talked
about.
Another process that cosmic rays are
responsible for is that they smash into
nuclei creating these showers of
fragments and this is a major source of
where some of the light isotopes of the
uh first elements in the periodic table
come from. It's a major source of the
light version of helium, helium 3, of
lithium, of burillium and boron.
sometimes in stars, sometimes in space.
Um, in between the stars,
cosmic rays will strike other atoms and
they use this process called the X
process to emit smaller nuclei and that
gives us the cosmic abundance of
elements like burillium and boron.
They're not otherwise created in stars.
Normal fusion creates helium from
hydrogen and then skips over the other
light elements going straight to carbon
and there on afterwards to heavier
elements. It doesn't make burillium and
boron um nor does it make lithium. So
actually most of the lithium, burillium
and boron that we find albeit in fairly
small amounts is created by cosmic rays
and has been created before the earth
was formed even by such processes.
We also think that cosmic rays were
responsible for an event 2.6 million
years ago. It rained cosmic rays,
radioactive iron, and all those uh heavy
nuclei that we saw coming from supernova
1987a
seemed to suddenly spike in sediments
from the ocean floor and in deep lake
beds like Lake Tangana.
We have found the evidence and you can
date it from the layering in the
sediments to 2.6 6 million years ago, it
seems that the Earth suddenly got
bombarded by quite significant
quantities of cosmic radiation that
would have done things like stripped the
ozone layer and led to yet more
ultraviolet from the sun coming in. And
all of that highly radioactive nature
seems to have led to a pulse of rapid
mutation causing rapid evolutionary
changes. And in fact, uh, a certain
amount of mass extinction went on,
including things like the megalodon
giant sharks disappeared at this
particular epoch.
Now I mentioned earlier that the
astronauts going to the moon had to fly
outside the earth's magnetic field
dodging the Van Allen belts and once
outside the earth's magnetic field they
were exposed directly to primary cosmic
rays. The spacecraft with its thin outer
shell didn't provide much protection and
so they got quite a significant uh dose
of radiation that way
including seeing strange effects in
their retina. Their retinas were
actually acting as cosmic ray detectors.
And these cosmic ray visual phenomena,
as they were dubbed, were flashes of
light even with your eyes shut that
seemed to occur every few minutes and
actually sufficiently much that they
were annoying and interfered with the
astronaut's ability to sleep. Now, it's
very very difficult to shield um an
astronaut from such phenomenon. So this
is something that people will still
worry about in terms of space flight.
And while we're on the subject of space
flight, let's have a think about Mars.
Mars lacks a cosmic uh deflector. It
doesn't have a magnetic field and it
doesn't have a thick atmosphere. So
cosmic rays make it to the ground in
much greater numbers. The Mars Science
Laboratory Rover was able to measure
radiation on the surface of the planet
in 2012, the first time we've actually
measured radiation on the surface of
another full-blown planet. And it was
significant. On Earth, you would measure
at ground level 0.62 rims per year. On
the space station, that goes up to eight
because the space station is in low
Earth orbit inside the Earth's magnetic
shield. But on the surface of Mars, the
level was 10 or even 20 rims per year.
So more significant.
Now actually
you would last quite a long time at that
level but a flight to Mars would also
expose you to more than 20 rims per year
as you were getting there. And the
lifetime safe dose is around 200. So you
would put up with maybe 10 years of
travel and existence on Mars before you
would be in danger of severe health
problems as a result. all sorts of
things like cancer, leukemia, etc. would
begin to become a major risk after about
10 years. And so for that reason, it's
highly likely that uh astronauts would
be able to go on a like a three-year
long mission, 6 months to get there, 6
months to get back, and two years on the
surface. Um, and come back with a dose,
but not a fatal one. But if you're going
to stay there, you're going to have to
protect yourself from these cosmic rays.
And this really means uh living
underground, burying your um habitat
under huge amounts of Martian soil
perhaps as being the only way to protect
yourself. And so with that, I will bring
this little talk about cosmic rays to an
end. And if you want to find others, you
know where to look. There's the QR code
for all my other YouTube videos. Thanks
very much for listening.